From everyone here at Sport Relief,
thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you.
Your money is changing
so many people’s lives.
Tonight we are in Weston—super—Mare.
Tonight we are in Weston-super-Mare.
Welcome
Tonight we are in Weston—super—Mare.
Welcome to Question Time.
On the panel tonight, Matt Hancock,
government Health Secretary, one of
the key people involved in
decision—making at the highest level
decision-making at the highest level
in this
decision—making at the highest level
in this coronavirus crisis. The
labour Mayor
Labour Mayor of Greater Manchester
labour Mayor of Greater Manchester
and
Labour Mayor of Greater Manchester
and former Health Secretary under
Gordon Brown during the swine flu
Gordon Brown during the swine ﬂu
aPP-
app, Andy
Gordon Brown during the swine flu
app, Andy Burnham projects Tom
Solomon, Doctor
Solomon, Doctorand
app, Andy Burnham projects Tom
Solomon, Doctor and director of the
UK’s emerging infections research
unit at Liverpool University put it
Frances O’Grady, general secretary
of the trained union in conquest,
the TUC put and Michelin starred
chef, TV presenter and owner of
several restaurants, Angela Hartnett
-- trades
—— trades union conquest. We are
-- trades union conquest. We are
doing a very
—— trades union conquest. We are
doing a very different programme on
Question Time for obvious reasons,
for the first time in our history
there is no studio audience but we
will be hearing from the people of
Weston—super—Mare who have kindly
Weston-super-Mare who have kindly
recorded
Weston—super—Mare who have kindly
recorded some questions for us and
we will play them via video link. As
we are live, we also want to hear
from you. Contact us in the usual
“Y
way on Twitter and social media,
@BBCQuestionTime, and I will feed in
OBBCOuestionTime, and I will feed in
as many
@BBCQuestionTime, and I will feed in
as many questions as I can to our
as many questions as I ran to our
panel, suitably
as many questions as I can to our
panel, suitably distanced, as we go
through. Let hit our first question
which is from a local doctor
which is from a local doctorJess
which is from a [oral doctorjess
Elliott. Hi, my
which is from a local doctorJess
Elliott. Hi, my name is
Elliott. Hi, my name isJess Elliott
Elliott. Hi, my name is jess Elliott
and I’m a junior
Elliott. Hi, my name isJess Elliott
and I’m a junior doctor working in
Weston—super—Mare. The situation
Weston-super-Mare. The situation
with the
Weston—super—Mare. The situation
with the coronavirus is a worrying
time for us all. Not least as
working in what are unprecedented
circumstances for the health
service. Many
service. Manyjunior doctors are
frightened that we will be in the
same position as Italy in a few
weeks with the coronavirus pandemic.
How are you going to ration
ventilators and other vital
equipment for patients and
protective equipment for staff when
the NHS becomes overwhelmed? Matt,
since we have you here, let’s start
with that, an issue about
ventilators as well as protective
equipment. There does not appear to
be enough but what is being done?
This is incredibly important. The
front line staff of the NHS to an
amazing job all the time but in the
coming weeks, they will be called on
for a heroic effort.
for a heroic effort. I know that
there are concerns on the front line
around making sure that the
protective equipment keeps coming. I
ran tell you
can tell you that over the last 2A
ran tell you that over the last 24
hours we
can tell you that over the last 2A
hours we have shipped 2.6 million
masks, 10,000 bottles of hand
sanitiser, and we have a growing
effort to get that equipment to the
front line. That is a huge
government effort that is going on
as we speak and even right through
the night we will be getting that
protective equipment output at
somebody like
somebody likeJess, and other
somebody like jess, and other
doctors
somebody likejess, and other
doctors around the UK,
. When can they expect to have that
. when ran they expect to have that
equipment?
. When can they expect to have that
equipment? Overnight we will get 150
hospitals the next pack of eight
protective equipment they need to
point out we have this in storage in
use
rase there
point out we have this in storage in
case there is a pandemic like this
rase there is a pandemic like this
and there
case there is a pandemic like this
and there are lorries on the roads
right now. Some hospitals will get
it overnight tonight and the rest
will get their next load before the
end of the weekend. Everything 3
end of the weekend. Everything a
hospital will
end of the weekend. Everything 3
hospital will get their next batch
protective equipment before Sunday
night. Some of the hospitals that
have been running a particularly
have been mnning a particularty
short in
have been running a particularly
short in the last 48 hours, we have
got it to them already. It is a
massive effort from the NHS, that
sunplv
supply chain and others to make sure
that happens. And Jess also asked
that happens. And jess also asked
about
that happens. And Jess also asked
about ventilators which are
particularly important because of
particularty important because of
the
particularly important because of
the nature of coronavirus and we
learned from what happened in Italy
that they are critical. We have
increased the capacity for
ventilators in the NHS already and
we have this call—out, we put the
we have this fall-out, we put the
cork out at
we have this call—out, we put the
cork out at the weekend for people
to make more of them because
although we are buying them at the
moment, we will clearly need more.
moment, we will dearty need more.
We have
moment, we will clearly need more.
We have had an amazing response to
that, at 1400
that, at M00 companies have come
that, at 1400 companies have come
forward
that, at M00 companies have come
forward and said they can turn that
forward and said they ran turn that
manufacturing
forward and said they can turn that
manufacturing capability to make
ventilators. The next thing we need
to do is train people to use them
because a ventilator without a
trained operator can be dangerous
trained operator ran be dangerous
especially
trained operator can be dangerous
especially the invasive ones for the
more serious cases, so we are
more serious rases, so we are
training NHS
more serious cases, so we are
training NHS doctors who are
currently doing other things,
specialists in other things, for
instance hip and knee operations,
training them to be able to put the
ventilators in a case the numbers
ventilators in a rase the numbers
really get that
ventilators in a case the numbers
really get that high. And can I ask,
really get that high. And ran I ask,
because
really get that high. And can I ask,
because it is 25 new countries
dubbing
clubbing together to buy ventilators
dubbing together to buy ventilators
in order
clubbing together to buy ventilators
in order to bulk buy them, the UK at
the moment is not part of that but
will we be? We are invited to be
part of that. We are invited but we
are not taking part at the moment.
We engaged with that process today.
We are not clear actually how much,
how many more ventilators we will
get through that process so frankly
we are getting on with it and buying
them from around the world, from the
UK producers and turning other
companies... Formula 1 have said
they will get their factories that
normally create cars and work with
their brilliant engineers to create
ventilators. The truth is, Fiona,
this will be a national effort and
we have to turn the whole resources
of the country to how to best stop
the growth of the virus, and grow
the NHS capacity to deal with it.
Tom, what is your response to what
jess said and
Jess said and what Matt has said?
Tom, what is your response to what
Jess said and what Matt has said? I
jess said and what Matt has said? I
think the
Jess said and what Matt has said? I
think the important thing,
ventilators are very important and
there are plans to make more as we
heard about. It may be that we have
to be a bit
to be a bit innovative and creative
given the nature of this emergency
which we are facing and I have
worked in parts of the world like
Southeast Asia and Africa where
there are ventilators which are made
of different spec and work in a
different way. It may be that we
will use ventilators of that sort so
we ran
we can use more quickly and evenly
we ran use more quickly and evenly
ran a data --
we can use more quickly and evenly
can a data —— in Canada they’re
ran a data -- in Canada therre
talking about
can a data —— in Canada they’re
talking about ventilators instead of
one Subotic restoration for one
person, you can support several
person, you ran support several
people come
person, you can support several
people come up to nine people, as
peopla come up to nine peopla, as
long as they
people come up to nine people, as
long as they have a similar need in
terms of support point of view feel
confident we will have enough?
ﬂ
I feel the numbers are going
Ifeel the numbers are going up
dramatically but also the number of
patients are going up.
m:
We are in uncertain territory and
eight race is on but I’m confident
we are doing everything we can to
we are doing everything we ran to
produce
we are doing everything we can to
produce enough ventilators in time.
In Liverpool where I work, I came
from the hospital this morning and
at the moment we have two ventilated
patients but capacity for about 20.
Depending on where you are in the
country, clearly in London the
country, dearty in London the
strain is
country, clearly in London the
strain is greater and that is where
the need for new ventilators will be
first. Let me ask you a response, we
have heard so many doctors saying
they don’t feel they have enough
equipment and they’re putting their
equipment and therre putting their
own
equipment and they’re putting their
own lives at risk,.
own lives at risk,. You have got to
feel for jess and
feel forJess and her colleagues
feel for jess and her colleagues
right now
feel forJess and her colleagues
right now but I remember hearing it
in 2009 when I was dealing with
swine flu. Know when they
swine flu. Know when they rate ——
swine ﬂu. Know when they rate --
nowhere
swine flu. Know when they rate ——
nowhere near as serious as this but
nonetheless serious so I know how
hard it is to be Matt right now.
It’s a difficult position and we all
have an interest in him succeeding
so nothing I say will be point
scoring, I would give my perspective
in terms of where we are. I was
hearing today that staff are reusing
protective masks in hospitals at the
moment. I was glad to hear that
lorries are on the road tonight but
that is quite urgent and it should
not be the case that any person in
not be the use that any person in
jess’s petition
not be the case that any person in
Jess’s petition should be using
jess’s petition should be using
crucial
Jess’s petition should be using
crucial equipment. Hopefully that
will be put right in the NHS but
there is a social care —— in her
there is a social rare -- in her
position. Social
there is a social care —— in her
position. Social care also need that
position. Social rare also need that
equipment
position. Social care also need that
equipment and that is the next
priority. On capacity, I remember in
2009 agonising about it, how we
could get more equipment income if
we could open more intensive care
we could open more intensive rare
beds and
we could open more intensive care
beds and went to the same thing. I
hear what the Secretary of State is
saying about Formula 1 and
manufacturing capability. I would
say to go a bit more route one, to
the private health care industry
the private health rare industry
pundit
the private health care industry
pundit there are beds and facilities
in private medicine in your
emergency bill, I would say to take
power to take over that capacity.
That surely has to be the first
thing you would do if there was a
crucial shortage. We should not be
thinking about rationing. We should
be using every power at our disposal
to get health capacity available to
the public as well as thinking about
the man puncturing solutions that
might be out there. Frances, what is
your view on that?
your view on that? First of all,
it’s important to pay tribute to
peopla like
people like Jess
it’s important to pay tribute to
people likeJess who are dedicated
professionals and doing an
incredible
incrediblejob in
professionals and doing an
incredible job in difficult
circumstances.
circumstances. As the TUC and
unions, we represent staff in the
health service. Of course we are not
just talking about doctors and
nurses. It is really important to
remember we are talking about
cleaners and porters and all the
other support staff because without
them, our hospitals cannot function.
them, our hospitals rannot function.
What
what we
them, our hospitals cannot function.
What we are hearing is exactly as
what we are hearing is exactly as
jess is saying,
What we are hearing is exactly as
Jess is saying, people need masks,
jess is saying, peopla need masks,
soap,
Jess is saying, people need masks,
soap, equipment to fight this
pandemic. They are telling you they
don’t have enough soap? We have had
that. You have to remember that this
is a team. People see themselves as
a team in the NHS and they know that
they depend on each other in order
to do the job they have to do. There
are real worries and they need to
get that sorted fast. And I am also
really interested in the ventilators
point. It is fantastic if we have
manufacturing companies prepared to
switch production. Our unions
representing manufacturing workers
want to do that
want to do thatjob but let’s be
want to do that job but let’s be
straight with
want to do thatjob but let’s be
straight with people. It is often
straight with peopla. It is often
not as
straight with people. It is often
not as simple as it sometimes is
portrayed put it switching
manufacturing, getting parts,
sometimes from China not always
easy. Let’s tell people the truth.
easy. Let’s tell peopla the truth.
We are
easy. Let’s tell people the truth.
We are grown—ups and we can take it.
We are grown-ups and we ran take it.
We want to
We are grown—ups and we can take it.
We want to know how long this will
take and, in the meantime, how do we
get that international cooperation
so we get the ventilators to where
they need to be most? And that takes
cooperation not point scoring
between nations but helping each
other and I could not agree more
with Andy. If we are going to pull
together as a nation, those private
health care companies need to pull
health rare companies need to pull
their weight.
health care companies need to pull
their weight. We have had a message
already from Rhiannon
already from RhiannonJackson. When
already from Rhiannon jackson. when
ran we expect
already from Rhiannonjackson. When
can we expect to see protective
ran we expect to see protective
equipment
can we expect to see protective
equipment being delivered to social
rare
care providers? Without it, the
disabled and elderly will not get
disablad and elderty will not get
the
disabled and elderly will not get
the care they rely on in the
the rare they rely on in the
community
the care they rely on in the
community or residential setting is
our workforce gets ill or worse,
transfers the virus thus putting
more pressure on the NHS. You have
talked about when you hope NHS work
will have it but what about social
rare?
care? That is happening as we speak.
rare? That is happening as we speak.
Every one of the
care? That is happening as we speak.
Every one of the 25,000 different
places where people are either in
social rare,
social care, in a care home, or
social rare, in a rare home, or
providers, those
social care, in a care home, or
providers, those who go out to
people’s homes, every single one of
those providers will get a package
of personal protective equipment.
And then we will make sure that more
keeps coming according to the scale
of the operation. It’s a very
complicated logistical effort,
especially with the social care
especially with the social rare
providers
especially with the social care
providers because there are so many.
Some are very small care homes, up
Some are very small rare homes, up
to the biggest
Some are very small care homes, up
to the biggest with a lot of homes.
And they rare
And they care for lots of people in
And they rare for lots of peopla in
their own
And they care for lots of people in
their own home. Social care is
their own home. Social rare is
absolutely
their own home. Social care is
absolutely getting the protective
equipment. When you anticipate they
equipment. when you anticipate they
will get that
equipment. When you anticipate they
will get that and when will it be
resolved? It is being resolved right
now and I would have thought that by
the end of next week every social
rare provider
care provider will have that, that
rare provider will have that, that
is the goal but
care provider will have that, that
is the goal but there was a broader
point. Often we talk about the NHS
and especially in political debate
is about the NHS. Really, the NHS
and social care together is
and social rare together is
critical,
and social care together is
critical, especially because of this
virus is more dangerous for older
peopla and we
people and we have got to look at
peopla and we have got to look at
the
people and we have got to look at
the whole team. I know you want to
the whola team. I know you want to
come in but
the whole team. I know you want to
come in but Angela, you run many
businesses and we will come onto
business but what you think hearing
this? You are someone who has
concerns about getting the infection
yourself or your workers?
yourself or your workers? Just
yourself or your workers? just
talking to
yourself or your workers? Just
talking to people today before I
talking to peopla today before I
fame
name on,
talking to people today before I
came on, obviously this is not my
norm but I think what Frances said,
facts
facts and accurate facts is what the
government needs to give us on every
level. If
level. IfI
government needs to give us on every
level. If I was running a care home,
lavel. If I was mnning a rare home,
I would like
level. If I was running a care home,
I would like to know from the
government when is it arriving a.
Saying overnight next week, if I’m
absolutely honest, isn’t good
enough. I want to know it arriving
in the next 2A hours or on Thursday.
in the next 24 hours or on Thursday.
To bring it to a
in the next 2A hours or on Thursday.
To bring it to a personal thing,
when we are in a crisis like we are,
we all think about ourselves because
we are naturally slightly selfish.
Might cousin’s mother is in a care
Might cousin’s mother is in a rare
home, they
Might cousin’s mother is in a care
home, they have coronavirus
incidents and at home and she’s over
80. She’s absolutely petrified, as
many people are. When is that care
many peopla are. when is that rare
home going to
many people are. When is that care
home going to get all the equipment
it needs to protect the elderly? I
it needs to protect the elderty? I
think
it needs to protect the elderly? I
think probably they are the most
vulnerable people in society at the
moment. We need the facts to know
when all this is happening. And I’m
saying it in a laissez faire
attitude but the more information
and accurate information the public
gets, we are so nervous now, it will
calm people down. I think what is
calm peopla down. I think what is
totally true,
calm people down. I think what is
totally true, we are trying to be as
transparent as possible, including
about the risks. As well as about
what we’re doing about. Let me put
another question in. I will try to
get as many questions as I can in
get as many questions as I ran in
giving it the
get as many questions as I can in
giving it the audience is virtual!
From Louisa. "When will front line
From Louisa. "when will front line
NHS staff he tested in England? They
are already being tested in Wales
and Scotland but not come pensively
in England, particularly those
in England, particularty those
having to
in England, particularly those
having to isolate due to illness. My
husband is stuck at home due to
possibla
possible coronavirus symptoms which
possibla coronavirus symptoms which
could be
possible coronavirus symptoms which
could he flew, he could return to
could be ﬂaw, he could return to
work soon
could he flew, he could return to
work soon if he knew but he cannot
afford the private test." We have
heard of the World Health
Organization take test, test, test
so what is your view on this
question is enough being done?
ﬂ
I think it is critical to test NHS
workers. It is critical to test
everyone if we can and the number of
everyone if we ran and the number of
tests
everyone if we can and the number of
tests available are going up, so it
is these two curves. At the moment,
the number of cases is greater than
the number of rases is greater than
our ability to
the number of cases is greater than
our ability to test but the testing
ability is ramping up and we want
the testing ability to overtake the
number of cases. Given that we
cannot test everyone at the moment,
rannot test everyone at the moment,
the priority has
cannot test everyone at the moment,
the priority has to be first of all
the patients, and that is happening
now, and the second priority I think
has to be health care workers
has to be health rare workers
because,
has to be health care workers
because, at the moment, if somebody,
you know, if
you know, ifI have
because, at the moment, if somebody,
you know, if I have a cough, then I
you know, ifI have a cough, then I
had to
you know, if I have a cough, then I
had to isolate myself at home for
seven days and then I will be going
back to work and we won’t know
whether I had coronavirus or not. I
might then have another cop a week
later and I would have to go for
seven days. Do you think we should
have started testing sooner? I think
we started testing incredibly
quickly. The minute the Chinese
released the information about the
genetic information of this virus,
genetic information of this vims,
Pub“:
genetic information of this virus,
Public Health England created a test
as soon as they possibly could and
then the issue is about scaling back
test up. You know, when we had five,
ten cases in
ten cases inJanuary, then I think
ten cases in january, then I think
if somebody
ten cases inJanuary, then I think
if somebody had said you need to
make hundreds of thousands of tests,
that would have seemed on sensible,
because you just don’t know at the
start of an outbreak. I know you are
a specialist in infectious diseases,
but I am not an expert... It seems
to me that planning for a pandemic
is something our authority should
have been doing and expect to do
because it is the scale of the issue
and, let’s be honest about this,
health staff and indeed staff in
social care are putting their health
social rare are putting their health
on the
social care are putting their health
on the line for us, and it seems to
me that the least they deserve is to
get tests and, also, because that’s
the best way we can deliver the
the best way we ran deliver the
service, so
the best way we can deliver the
service, so that we can get people
service, so that we ran get people
back to
service, so that we can get people
back to work quickly. I would agree
with that. As we’ve heard, we now
have a Department of Health and
social rare,
social care, this is one team of
social rare, this is one team of
workers
social care, this is one team of
workers and testing, I think, of key
workers goes across the board. I
couldn’t agree more. I chaired the
first meeting yesterday of the way
to Manchester Covid—19 committee and
to Manchester Covid-19 committee and
I put the all out
to Manchester Covid—19 committee and
I put the call out before I went
I put the all out before I went
about
I put the call out before I went
about what are the issues you think
are not getting the special
attention that need to be put up the
priority list and testing of NHS and
social care staff was the issue that
social rare staff was the issue that
fame
social care staff was the issue that
came back. NHS staff clearly don’t
came back. NHS staff dearty don’t
think it is
came back. NHS staff clearly don’t
think it is happening fast enough,
they are tweeting, they are putting
things in the paper. This is an area
we focused on a lot in 2009. And I
know it was part of the pandemic
plan, but when there was this
feeling of we are going for a more
herd immunity approach, may I was
taken off the ball up testing a
little more, I don’t know. Matt may
say something different. What I
say something different. what I
heard
say something different. What I
heard today from a very senior
manager in the National Health
Service is there is a lot of
scepticism in the system about
25,000 tests per day and I would
like to hear
like to hearfrom
25,000 tests per day and I would
like to hear from the Secretary of
State about when that would be
delivered, because people are saying
they cannot see how that can be
delivered anytime soon, because it
requires standing down the screening
capacity and freeing up lab capacity
in other parts of the NHS and people
in other parts of the NHS and peopla
are stmggling
in other parts of the NHS and people
are struggling to see when it comes
are stmggling to see when it comes
through. That is
are struggling to see when it comes
through. That is a key issue. Like
the masks, people want to know
the masks, peopla want to know
exactly when
the masks, people want to know
exactly when they will this
reassurance.
So when will we see the 25,000
tests? I have been buying test
today, that is what I have been
spending most of my day on. Tom is
absolutely right, Public Health
England came out with the first test
on this within days of the viral
code being made public and then we
have been increasing test capacity
all the time since then. We have hit
a 10000 and we hit that target
sooner than we anticipated and the
problem is that, as the virus, as
the number of people increases on an
exponential curve, the number of
tests is going up in a linear
direction and we have got good news,
though, which is that, from today,
we have been able to buy a new type
of test which is, instead of finding
out, having to take the swab, send
it to a lab and get it back, which
is taking quite a lot of time and
anyone who has had a test knows it
takes a couple of days at best, the
new type of test allows you to, it
is more like a pregnancy test, you
ran take it
can take it immediately, it is blood
ran take it immediately, it is blood
prick. This is to
can take it immediately, it is blood
prick. This is to check if you have
had coronavirus? If you have had it
and are immune and have the
antibodies. Does that definitely
work and is it definitely going to
into production? Will we see that?
into production? will we see that?
That is in
into production? Will we see that?
That is in production and we have
been buying that today for the first
time. It only got approved in the
last few days. That is clearly a
brilliant step forward and to be
welcomed but it is a different type
of test. What Andy is asking you is
of test. what Andy is asking you is
the 25,000
of test. What Andy is asking you is
the 25,000 tests per day, when is
that going to happen? That is going
to happen in the next couple of
weeks. We are going as fast as we
ran but
can but we are also, on the test for
ran but we are also, on the test for
whether you
can but we are also, on the test for
whether you have the coronavirus,
whether you have the coronavims,
which is
whether you have the coronavirus,
which is different from the test of
whether you have had coronavirus,
whether you have had coronavims,
the test
whether you have had coronavirus,
the test of whether you have it now,
we are also working with some of the
leading companies in the field
radically to increase the number of
those tests. Because I totally agree
with the world of their health ——
with the world of their health --
the head
with the world of their health ——
the head of the World Health
Organisation, the way that we can
understand what is happening, who
has got coronavirus and who has had
it and both treat people better but
also slow the spread is the
combination of understanding who has
got it through the testing, who has
got it and ran
got it and can go back to work and
got it and ran go back to work and
it is only the
got it and can go back to work and
it is only the combination of
technology and testing where we can
technology and testing where we ran
get a grip on
technology and testing where we can
get a grip on this curve and,
hopefully, in time, reduce some of
the incredibly Draconian measures
that we’ve had to take this week.
0K,
OK, I’m going to take a slightly
different tack on a subject for a
moment, I want to hear
moment, I want to hearfrom another
moment, I want to hear from another
of our peopla
moment, I want to hearfrom another
of our people from
Weston—super—Mare. Nigel, who owns
of our peopla from
Weston-super-Mare. Nigel, who owns a
shop making
Weston—super—Mare. Nigel, who owns a
shop making blinds in the area. As a
small business owner who employs
nine people, I am concerned about
the future of the business. There
are many services such as ours where
workers --
workers —— work is in the customer’s
workers -- work is in the customer
home. with
workers —— work is in the customer’s
home. With increased self isolation,
home. with increased self isolation,
we will
home. With increased self isolation,
we will be able to complete existing
contracts for some time and unable
contracts for some time and unabla
to plan future
contracts for some time and unable
to plan future work. This means cash
to plan future work. This means rash
ﬂow is poor, my
to plan future work. This means cash
flow is poor, my business
interruption insurance doesn’t seem
to cover me and yet my moral
obligation is to pay my staff and
maintain my business. However the
Government proposing to help
companies like mine? —— how are. One
companies like mine? -- how are. One
month’s payroll
companies like mine? —— how are. One
month’s payroll would exceed £10,000
grant. That is Nigel from
Weston—super—Mare. Angela, as an
Weston-super-Mare. Angela, as an
owner of
Weston—super—Mare. Angela, as an
owner of restaurants, this is
something you have to deal with, so
what have you been saying to your
workers? We, unfortunately, along
with many fellow restaurateurs, and
I ran only
I can only speak for London,
with many fellow restaurateurs, and
I can only speakfor London, we have
I ran only speak for London, we have
closed, we
I can only speakfor London, we have
closed, we have shot our restaurants
dosed, we have shot our restaurants
last night, it is
closed, we have shot our restaurants
last night, it is four restaurants I
have, 140 people approximately that
have, 140 peopla approximately that
we have
have, 140 people approximately that
we have asked to go on to unpaid
leave. Some may want redundancy. I
have done it for a few reasons. One,
as I said before, it is the
information coming from the
Government. So many flying rumours
Government. So many ﬂying mmours
around
Government. 50 many flying rumours
around that London is on lockdown,
is it not? I employ European staff,
so I wanted the opportunity for them
to go home. When the Prime Minister
to go home. when the Prime Minister
stood up on the
to go home. When the Prime Minister
stood up on the Tuesday press
briefing and said don’t go to clubs,
bars, restaurants, that decimated
our business. 70, 80% of the
our business. 70, 8096 of the
bookings
our business. 70, 80% of the
bookings were knocked off. And what
are your employees saying to you and
what have you said to them in terms
of future employment? We are in
offuture employment? We are in
daily contact,
of future employment? We are in
daily contact, e—mailing over what
daily contact, e-mailing over what
is happening.
daily contact, e—mailing over what
is happening. We are waiting, we
need initiatives from the
Government. Fantastic that the
Chancellor gave us these billions
and billions of pounds. What we need
and billions of pounds. what we need
now, if you like,
and billions of pounds. What we need
now, if you like, the laws or
however the Government does it to
55V
say landlords give us a free three
month rent period. Yes, I’m going to
pay every single person in the
hospitality sector £1000 a week or a
month to sustain, cover their rent
period. These people are on low
incomes. It was bad enough when we
were treated as an industry where we
were called unskilled Labour and
unskilled workers. These people have
to pay their rent, they have
families to support, bills to pay.
And our industry, we are the third
biggest employer in the country and
the knock—on effect, this gentleman
the knock-on effect, this gentleman
included, we
the knock—on effect, this gentleman
included, we buy blinds for
restaurants. It is not
restaurants. It is notjust the
restaurants. It is not just the
home.
restaurants. It is notjust the
home. And what about the loan is the
Government have suggested, is that
any use? I think it will be but,
again, it is how we access them. We
need to know the banks will actually
back-up
back—up these loans, we have two
back-up these loans, we have two
different
back—up these loans, we have two
different banks and they don’t seem
dear
clear how they are going to work so,
again, information. And, two, it is
that double edged sword. We have
closed restaurants because we felt
dosed restaurants berause we felt
it was
closed restaurants because we felt
it was best for staff, customers,
health and safety but there is no
income coming through and we will
struggle when we open up. So when we
open up, there will be a cash flow
open up, there will be a rash ﬂow
issue and
open up, there will be a cash flow
issue and we won’t have customers
like that so do I get into a loan of
half a million,
halfa million, £1 million?
like that so do I get into a loan of
half a million, £1 million? These
halfa million, £1 million? These
are the
half a million, £1 million? These
are the questions we need to know.
Or if I take the loan, do I have two
Orifltaketheloan, dolhavetwo
years
Orifltaketheloan,dolhavetwo
yearsto
yearstopay
Orifltaketheloan,dolhavetwo
yearstopayit
Or if I take the loan, do I have two
years to pay it back? Then I can
years to pay it back? Then I ran
seriously say,
years to pay it back? Then I can
seriously say, fantastic, I can pay
seriously say, fantastic, I ran pay
my staff for
seriously say, fantastic, I can pay
my staff for three months because I
know I have that period. Lots of
questions to answer and we need the
information and the feeling is it
will be coming out, but at 5pm, I am
glued to that TV, what is the
Chancellor going to give us? You and
lots of peoplo.
lots of people. Frances, this is
lots of peopla. Frances, this is
something
lots of people. Frances, this is
something you are hearing a lot,
too. Yes, small businesses, even in
my [oral
my local community, I
too. Yes, small businesses, even in
my local community, Ijust get
my local community, I just get that
my [oral community, Ijust get that
sense of a
my local community, I just get that
sense of a real need for certainty
and detail, because many of those
announcements are welcome, cash flow
announcements are welcome, rash ﬂow
is a real problem
announcements are welcome, cash flow
is a real problem but if you are
living on the edge, then you’ve got
to take decisions so you need to be
able to access it quickly and, of
course, the staff, what happens to
them? Are they straight on to
benefits, is that it? Because a lot
of peopla are
of people are going to struggle. And
of peopla are going to stmggle. And
not just a
of people are going to struggle. And
notjust a small business owners,
not just a small business owners,
millions
notjust a small business owners,
millions of self—employed people,
millions of self-employed peopla,
some
millions of self—employed people,
some of them, in our view, not
genuinely self—employed, some of
genuinely self-employed, some of
them put
genuinely self—employed, some of
them put onto bogus self—employment
them put onto bogus self-employment
contracts
them put onto bogus self—employment
contracts precisely to avoid paying
their basic rights like sick pay.
But the idea that they can survive
But the idea that they ran survive
for a
But the idea that they can survive
for a sustained period on benefits
is a real problem. But, you know,
this is an argument we are making
more broadly in terms of workers.
How do we make sure that we don’t
just bail
just bailout
How do we make sure that we don’t
just bail out the boardrooms? We got
just bailout the boardrooms? We got
to bail
to bailout
just bail out the boardrooms? We got
to bail out workers, they got food
to put on the table, children to
raise, and statutory sick pay, £91; a
raise, and statutory sick pay, £94 a
week, it is not
raise, and statutory sick pay, £91; a
week, it is not enough. Matt, I
think you would be the first on to
55V
say that you couldn’t live on that.
I don’t think any of us could. Could
you? No. But you expect others to?
No, I
No, Ithink
you? No. But you expect others to?
No, I think we have got to support
everybody and support both
businesses
businesses to help support their
staff, we want businesses to support
their staff because the best
their staff because the best thing
is if people stay in employment. You
is if peoplo stay in employment. You
know, this is a
is if people stay in employment. You
know, this is a once in a century
event... But we know that. We know
all that, but we had the Prime
Minister saying today, businesses,
keep your employees on, support
them, because we are going to
support you but you’ve got Angela
here saying I don’t know what is
going to happen. I was coming on to
that. This is a once in a century
event and it means that the whole
resources of the country have got to
be turned on how best we get through
this as a country. You know, it is
because we are all humans that we
are all susceptible to the virus, so
we need to all come together to
support each other through it and
that, of course, the only
organisation, the only organisation
that is big enough to do that in a
calamity of this scale is the
Government, so absolutely we are
going to come to the aid of
businesses as fast as we possibly
ran, so that
can, so that businesses can keep
ran, so that businesses ran keep
their
can, so that businesses can keep
their staff on, so that you are
there... Angela has already let hers
go. No, she has actually kept them
on, although unpaid for now, so we
need to come to Angela’s aid,
because, when this is over, I want
Angela able to open her restaurants
again. And we have got to look after
peopla, we’ve
people, we’ve got to look after
businesses, as well as fight the
disease and we got to use the whole
resources of the state to do this. I
have sympathy with what Matty saying
because if I look back at our
experience, we had an economic crash
in 2008 and then a health crisis in
2009, and now this Government has
got them together, so I absolutely
do have a lot of sympathy with what
being said. However, here is the
criticism, or the challenge. The
Government has taken a lot of
measures this week that have sounded
good but never, not quite given all
the answers that people like Angela
the answers that peopla like Angela
are looking
the answers that people like Angela
are looking for. But the problem is
the Government has done the least
for the people who need help the
most, and I am talking about people
most, and I am talking about peopla
in low paid,
most, and I am talking about people
in low paid, insecure employment,
peopla who
people who are self—employed, people
peopla who are self-employed, peopla
who are
people who are self—employed, people
who are on benefits already or out
of work and the problem, the reason
it is a problem for the Government,
is that those people can’t follow
is that those peopla ran’t follow
the
is that those people can’t follow
the Government’s advice to
self—isolate, they have to go into
self-isolate, they have to go into
work and
self—isolate, they have to go into
work and some of them work in social
rare. And
care. And that is not a good thing.
rare. And that is not a good thing.
So they should
care. And that is not a good thing.
So they should have been the first
EWUP-
group, I would say, to be helped,
not the last and the Government
really needs to address this. It is
rash
cash flow for businesses, let be ——
rash ﬂow for businesses, let be --
maybe really
cash flow for businesses, let be ——
maybe really clear about that. The
Chamber of Commerce for Greater
Manchester wanted me to make that
point, the businesses need money,
they needed today but it will have
to be tomorrow but it should come
with the condition that the money is
used to pay staff and keep them on.
Gordon Brown was making this point
incredibly powerfully on the radio
incredibly powerfuuy on the radio
today,
incredibly powerfully on the radio
today, because if we keep a like
Angela’s a
Angela’s afloat
today, because if we keep a like
Angela’s a float and we keep staff
Angela’s a ﬂoat and we keep staff
in position,
Angela’s a float and we keep staff
in position, this is the crucial
point, it will help people know to
point, it will help peopla know to
do the right
point, it will help people know to
do the right thing and follow the
Government’s advice. But, crucially,
it will make the recovery easier
after all this is over because we
will have businesses that are there,
staff that are there, ready to go
and the Government needs to act on
this tomorrow. It needs to increase
statutory sick pay, as you just
acknowledge yourself. It needs to
remove the restrictions on
jobseeker’s allowance, increase
Universal Credit, guarantee people’s
wages with a Government contribution
to those wages, help self—employed
to those wages, help self-employed
peopla more
to those wages, help self—employed
people more than saying apply for
Universal Credit. It needs to do all
of these things tomorrow because
that is going to help us in the long
term recover
term recoverfrom
that is going to help us in the long
term recover from this,
term recoverfrom this, not
that is going to help us in the long
term recoverfrom this, notjust
term recover from this, notjust a
term recover from this, not just a
health
term recover from this, notjust a
health crisis but the economic
crisis as well. Let’s just hear
quickly from Caitlin, who works in a
pub here in Weston—super—Mare.
I’v
e
I’ve been working on a local pub and
I’ve been working on a [oral pub and
a
I’ve been working on a local pub and
a zero—hours contract but was
a zero-hours contract but was
guaranteed a
a zero—hours contract but was
guaranteed a shift from week to week
but since the advice from the Prime
Minister to stop visiting places
like pubs are the custom has dried
“P
up and so have our ships. I’m lucky
enough to not have any bills to pay
and no one to depend on the. But
there are many who I know have
children to feed and rent to pay who
will struggle in the coming weeks.
What does the government intend to
what does the government intend to
do to help
What does the government intend to
do to help these people? And I’m
getting a lot of messages about
that. I know you are Health
Secretary and we expect to hear from
the Chancellor tomorrow. But what
ran you tell us
can you tell us tonight live with a
ran you tell us tonight live with a
lot of peopla
can you tell us tonight live with a
lot of people are listening in terms
lot of peopla are listening in terms
of
lot of people are listening in terms
of the points that Caitlin has made,
Nigel Nate and Andy made about what
is coming tomorrow? I’d
wholeheartedly agree with the
arguments being put and we are going
to deliver on that. The first people
to deliver on that. The first peopla
who
to deliver on that. The first people
who we’ve changed the rules to help
who we’ve changed the mles to help
within
who we’ve changed the rules to help
within the budget, ten days ago,
feels like a lifetime ago, to make
sure that people, who were in a
sure that peopla, who were in a
position of
sure that people, who were in a
position of working and not getting
statutory sick pay right from the
start, they will get that and we
published the legislation to make it
happen today and it is law as of
today. Second thing we have to do is
keep people in work because the best
“Y
way to make sure we are ready to
bounce back is to keep people in
their
theirjobs, even when their
businesses are struggling or closed,
businesses are stmggling or closed,
essentially
businesses are struggling or closed,
essentially because of decisions
that the government has had to make
for health reasons. And the third
thing is we have to directly help
peopla and
people and get money into people’s
peopla and get money into people’s
pockets to
people and get money into people’s
pockets to help them through this.
You have already said you could not
live on a statutory sick pay, it’s
not enough, so will people get more
not enough, so will peopla get more
than
not enough, so will people get more
than that? I’m not going to prejudge
what the Chancellor will say
tomorrow but all I can say is mark
tomorrow but all I ran say is mark
my words, we
tomorrow but all I can say is mark
my words, we will do everything we
ran to
can to make sure that people are
ran to make sure that peopla are
supported
can to make sure that people are
supported through this. That is the
only way to deal with a once in a
century event like this because we
have to keep the whole public
together. And it made the point very
powerfuuy --
powerfully —— Andy made the point
powerfuuy -- Andy made the point
point we are
powerfully —— Andy made the point
point we are asking people to do
point we are asking peopla to do
incredibly
point we are asking people to do
incredibly unusual things, for
instance to stay at home and not to
go out. And if they are ill, not to
go to work. We have got to make sure
that they are not penalised for
doing the right thing because the
worst thing would be if people go
worst thing would be if peopla go
out and
worst thing would be if people go
out and spread this virus because
they are not given the support to
follow the rules we ourselves in
follow the mles we ourselves in
government
follow the rules we ourselves in
government are having to put in
place for health reasons.
Emphatically I am in support of the
Emphatirally I am in support of the
action we
Emphatically I am in support of the
action we have taken, hundreds of
billions of pounds worth of action,
and the action that we are
finalising the details are. Will
tomorrow answer all of these things?
What I felt a little bit at the
moment is that these statements at
the moment are half answering things
are not fully answering. Let me just
read something. In our virtual way
we want to hear from our audience,
Roslyn says, "There are millions of
freelance self employed traders who
find themselves with their entire
income for many months pulled under
the current provisions for employees
and businesses don’t necessarily
include them. Will aid be
introduced?" Martin says, I have
staff and ready to lay off, what are
you 1“P
you tap into small businesses to
make this personal protective
equipment and prevent people." I’m
interested in the comparison between
the scientific and health response
and the economic response. It seems
to me on the scientific side we have
EWUPS
groups like Sage, #BBCQT —— SpyM do
groups like Sage, #BBCOT -- SpyM do
the modelling
groups like Sage, #BBCQT —— SpyM do
the modelling and the response has
been quick but the economic side, it
seems like we have been caught a bit
seems like we have been taught a bit
on the hop and
seems like we have been caught a bit
on the hop and having to make
statements and try to fill in
details afterwards. I wondered, you
details afterwards. Iwondered, you
have said
details afterwards. I wondered, you
have said it is a once in a century
event, it is that health event as
well as an economic event now. If
you compare them, do you feel that
on the economic side of things are a
bit lacking or have people been
bit lacking or have peopla been
taught
caught out
bit lacking or have people been
caught out by it? No, I think the
response on the economic side by the
Chancellor has been unbelievably
fast considering the scale of the
economic consequences of the health
decisions we have had to make. But
in government, having to take the
decisions of the scale that we have
over the past two weeks it has been
extraordinary. And of course the
hard question is, how do we turn a
decision at one of those podiums in
Downing Street into real cash going
Downing Street into real rash going
into
Downing Street into real cash going
into people’s pockets. You see other
countries who are behind us in terms
of the number of deaths but are
doing more to help workers, paying
75% of their wages so that they can
7596 of their wages so that they ran
not be
75% of their wages so that they can
not be stuck on a small wage. We did
something this week with mortgage
holidays. That might benefit people
holidays. That might benefit peopla
but it
holidays. That might benefit people
but it will also benefit landlords
when the priority should have been
renters, they should have been the
first priority. We have got to do
all these things. It’s not
all these things. It’s notjust Pace
all these things. It’s not just Pace
but who you
all these things. It’s notjust Pace
but who you prioritise first, and
the point you agreed with a moment
ago, help the people who cannot
ago, help the peopla who cannot
afford...
ago, help the people who cannot
afford... If they don’t get help,
they can’t follow the advice. The
prioritisation has to be a little
more in tune with the level of need.
Is the first people who we helped
were people who otherwise would not
have got a statutory sick pay. Must
say, on the question itself, if you
are regularty
are regularly getting hours on a
zero—hours contract, you are
zero-hours contract, you are
eligibla for
zero—hours contract, you are
eligible for statutory sick pay and
eligibla for statutory sick pay and
it’s
eligibla for stamtory sick pay and
it’s illegal
eligible for statutory sick pay and
it’s illegal not to pay it. Let’s be
honest, there are 2 million people
in this country who don’t earn
enough to qualify for statutory sick
PaY-
pay. They earn less than £118 and
pay. They earn lass than £118 and
therre
pay. They earn less than £118 and
they’ re currently
they’re currently being offered, if
therre currently being offered, if
they need to
they’re currently being offered, if
they need to self—isolate or they
they need to self-isolate or they
are sick, they
they need to self—isolate or they
are sick, they are offered benefits.
Let’s be frank about that one. I
think what we all have to play our
part with,
mummJ
think what we all have to play our
part with, I met the Chancellor
today to discuss exactly this issue
that we know, in Denmark and Germany
and Sweden, we have these schemes
that do put money directly into the
pockets of workers. 50 that an
pockets of workers. So that an
employer
pockets of workers. 50 that an
employer who
pockets of workers. So that an
employer who otherwise might be
thinking, because the credit
facility will not help every
business, there are some significant
businesses that we know, our
officers on the ground negotiating
and coming to agreements with those
businesses, they know they are in
trouble. We know some big decisions
troubla. We know some big decisions
will be
trouble. We know some big decisions
will be taken over the next 48
hours. And I welcomed the efforts to
look at bringing in a scheme that
will replace incomes, provide that
kind of 75% 25% possibly on a very
kind of 7596 2596 possibly on a very
big salt. But
kind of 75% 25% possibly on a very
big scale. But we have to get the
big stale. But we have to get the
delivery and I
big scale. But we have to get the
delivery and I do agree that every
day counts at the moment. Our people
day counts at the moment. Our peopla
are
day counts at the moment. Our people
are dealing with redundancies,
lay-offs,
lay—offs, short time working and you
lay-offs, short time working and you
are quite right,
lay—offs, short time working and you
are quite right, Matt, that when we
get through this, which we must, we
have got to have decent
have got to have decentjobs for
have got to have decent jobs for
peopla to
have got to have decentjobs for
people to hold onto, to grow our
peopla to hold onto, to grow our
economy so
people to hold onto, to grow our
economy so that all of us will
benefit and we fund our public
services. That is what Gordon Brown
spoke about, two waves of
unemployment. We are seeing the
first now
first new and this will cause a
first now and this will cause a
second
first new and this will cause a
second wave of unemployment. For me
it is putting people on unpaid
it is putting peopla on unpaid
leave,
it is putting people on unpaid
leave, they can’t afford to go to
the shop, buy clothes... And there
has to be a transition in there as
well, it has to be jobs and fair
wages. Exactly. We have quite a few
pressures to get through.
ﬂ
I would like to hear from a
I would like to hearfrom a person
I would like to hear from a person
from
I would like to hearfrom a person
from Weston—super—Mare, Jacqueline
from Weston-super-Mare, jacqueline
Harris
from Weston—super—Mare, Jacqueline
Harris who is an educational
assessment director. My husband and
I are both in our 70s and my husband
I are both in our 705 and my husband
as a
I are both in our 70s and my husband
as a serious health problems. With
as a serious health problams. with
rarers,
carers, I
as a serious health problams. with
carers, Ialso
as a serious health problems. With
carers, I also look after my
94-year-old
94—year—old mother who has
Alzheimer’s. And continuing to
collact
collect prescriptions and food
because pharmacies can no longer
because pharmacies ran no longer
take on
because pharmacies can no longer
take on home deliveries and there
was a three—week wait for online
was a three-week wait for online
supermarket
was a three—week wait for online
supermarket deliveries. My question
is, how do I balance the risks
between collecting medication and
between collecting meditation and
food
between collecting medication and
food and potentially spreading the
virus, and how do we ramp up
capacity to meet the demands on
rarers,
carers, pharmacies and supermarket
rarers, pharmacies and supermarket
workers?
carers, pharmacies and supermarket
workers? Let me add to that, we had
a message from John, it broke my
a message from john, it broke my
heart, said,
a message from John, it broke my
heart, said, "I’m over
heart, said, "I’m over70
a message from John, it broke my
heart, said, "I’m over 70 and
classed as vulnerable, I’ve tried to
classed as vulnerabla, I’ve tried to
book an
classed as vulnerable, I’ve tried to
book an online shop for my groceries
to save going out and the earliest I
to save going out and the eartiest I
ran get is the
to save going out and the earliest I
can get is the 29th of March. How am
ran get is the 29th of March. How am
I supposed to
can get is the 29th of March. How am
I supposed to last ten days with no
food?‘
food?" Tom? This is happening now
food?‘ Tom? This is happening now
and it’s a
food?" Tom? This is happening now
and it’s a desperately sad
situation. The only positive thing,
one of the positives from this
crisis is that we are seeing these
community groups cropping up all
over the place. We are seeing
younger healthy people volunteering.
One of my daughters is saying she is
going to help people locally. In
going to help peopla locally. In
this
going to help people locally. In
this kind of situation, if we can
this kind of situation, if we ran
put peopla
this kind of situation, if we can
put people together with those not
add so much risk if they do the
shopping, younger people, teenagers,
adults at less risk, that might be
adults at lass risk, that might be
one way. It is
adults at less risk, that might be
one way. It is clearly
one way. It is clearlyJohn who
one way. It is dearty john who
needs help
one way. It is clearlyJohn who
needs help right now. Where is he in
needs help right now. where is he in
the country? I
needs help right now. Where is he in
the country? I can’t tell you at the
moment. But it has been a fantastic
response in many parts of the
country, people coming together to
country, peopla coming together to
help but it’s
country, people coming together to
help but it’s obviously not ideal.
But we are in a crisis situation
where we have to use different
approaches to sort out problems. In
approaches to sort out problams. In
terms of
approaches to sort out problems. In
terms of what Jacqueline is the
terms of what jacqueline is the
same,
terms of what Jacqueline is the
same, balancing the risks between
collecting medication and food and
collecting meditation and food and
potentially
collecting medication and food and
potentially spreading the virus...
She has to get her medicine. She is
wondering how to balance the risk.
It is tough and you have to feel for
somebody in her position. Tom said,
there are so much good things
happening to focus on the positives
for a minute, there are seven great
things about the country, people
things about the country, peopla
stepping
things about the country, people
stepping forward at a moment like
this -- so many
this —— so many great things pundit
this -- so many great things pundit
Gary Neville
this —— so many great things pundit
Gary Neville made his hotels
available to the country. It is
great when you see what people are
prepared to do but more help is
needed. This is where somebody in my
position comes in because we can
position comes in because we ran
create a
position comes in because we can
create a people support system for
this crisis. The committee I
mentioned before, we met yesterday
and the suggestion is that we might
ask the Fire service in Greater
Manchester to start ringing people
Manchester to start ringing peopla
in that
Manchester to start ringing people
in that position to say, what you
need, what can be done? We have
need, what ran be done? We have
launched a
need, what can be done? We have
launched a website to mobilise
volunteers. It is not finished yet
but we are trying to build eight new
support system where we use all of
the capacity we have got put the
Royal Mail in parts of Greater
Manchester offered to do some home
deliveries of items. It is coming
together. We can’t leave it all to
be spontaneous and groups doing this
and that, we are trying to create a
stmcture
structure through which it can
stmcture through which it ran
happen. I
structure through which it can
happen. I hope next week we should
be able to have that beginning to
work. Angela? I
work. Angela? Ithink
be able to have that beginning to
work. Angela? I think a lot of
peopla have
people have done very much the same,
there are WhatsApp groups in our
neighbourhood and we can boast with
neighbourhood and we ran boast with
our [oral
neighbourhood and we can boast with
our local council and put in local
our [oral council and put in [oral
peopla and it’s
our local council and put in local
people and it’s literally who needs
help and that there are 18 or older
peopla who
people who will get deliveries from
about neighbours who can pick up
medicine. And it has to be that
community spirit. If there are
initiatives from local councils to
initiatives from [oral councils to
start
initiatives from local councils to
start with. ..
start with... We have talked about
rash ﬂow
cash flow for businesses, how about
rash ﬂow for businesses, how about
for
cash flow for businesses, how about
for councils? I know it’s not
popular but it needs to be said.
More new
More now than I used to see it! They
need more support to do this.
Doesn’t it bring up the best and
worst in people if we are honest? I
worst in peopla if we are honest? I
think actually
worst in people if we are honest? I
think actually at the Royal Mail
initiative, it is the postal
worker’s union who put up that
proposition pulled up they want to
play a part. But don’t we have to
hold a mirror up to ourselves
because when I look at some of those
supermarket shelves, people sweeping
“P
up toilet rolls and soap, all the
rest of it, disinfectant, it was
almost like survival of the fittest.
I do understand, when we are scared,
often we think about our families
first. But don’t we also as a
community have to think about our
neighbours, workmates, the elderly
neighbours, workmates, the elderty
and
neighbours, workmates, the elderly
and vulnerable? And start getting
our heads screwed on about our
values in this country. How have we
got here? Last time you are on, you
said you were working with
supermarkets to make sure it people
self-isolating
self—isolating they will be able to
self-isolating they will be able to
get food
self—isolating they will be able to
get food supplies. As you will know,
a lot of supermarket have said he’s
not talking to us so I’m not sure
who you meant. We were talking to
the supermarkets. One supermarket
executive said they weren’t. There
was more than one. If we have a
situation where someone like
situation where someone likeJohn
situation where someone like john
cannot get an
situation where someone likeJohn
cannot get an online shop until the
29th of March... Said two weeks ago
was accurate. The supermarkets I
think are rising to this. They are
not the only part of the answer. For
instance, Iceland were the first to
introduce a silver hour at the start
of the day so that people could go
of the day so that peopla could go
to the
of the day so that people could go
to the supermarket, when the shells
had been stacked overnight, if they
were over 70. Keep two metres or six
feet from other people and stay
safe, and get their supplies. And I
think that sort of measure from the
supermarket is important. It is
really important to say on public
health grounds, you must go out and
get your medicines and get food,
just stay away from other people as
just stay away from other peopla as
much as you
just stay away from other people as
much as you can.
There is a broader point, Andy,
which is, yes, we are putting money
into councils, we put £1.6 billion
in today and, yes, the councils,
this is a moment for councils to
really rise, just as you are doing
in Manchester as the organising
group. But there is also something
everybody can do. Not only following
everybody ran do. Not only following
the
everybody can do. Not only following
the rules in terms of self
the mles in terms of self
isolation,
the rules in terms of self
isolation, but if every single
person who is fit and healthy checks
the door on their left and checks
the door on their right and over the
road and does it in a respectful,
community minded way, then we will
find help for lots of people. So
find help for lots of peopla. So
yes,
find help for lots of people. So
yes, there is a role for Government,
a role for charities and councils,
a rolc for charities and councils,
but
a role for charities and councils,
but everybody can play a part in
but everybody ran play a part in
this. just
but everybody can play a part in
this. Just keeping you on
supermarkets for a minute, since
that was the question there, some
supermarkets are making their own
decision to have, as you say, the
special hour when the elderly can go
special hour when the elderty ran go
in or they say
special hour when the elderly can go
in or they say you can only buy four
in or they say you ran only buy four
or two of
in or they say you can only buy four
or two of something. You’re leaving
it up to them. You don’t think there
is a role for Government to be
is a rola for Government to be
saying you ran
is a role for Government to be
saying you can only sell this much
saying you ran only sell this much
to one person
saying you can only sell this much
to one person at a time? You are
happy to live it up to them, even
though we have a situation where
peopla can’t
people can’t get an online delivery?
We have been working with
supermarkets for many weeks to
prepare in this eventuality. That
work had been going on and was why I
talked about it last time, and it is
absolutely... It got to be this sort
of measures to stop this mass spying
have got to be increased. Can I make
have got to be increased. (“an I make
a
have got to be increased. Can I make
a constructive suggestion? I think
you need to give councils an ability
to go to the front of the queue with
people like
people likeJohn, who needs to get
people like john, who needs to get
to the
people likeJohn, who needs to get
to the front of the queue. I was
told today somebody who has cystic
fibrosis, I think late 20s or 30s,
fibrosis, I think late 205 or 305,
who doesn’t have the ability to get
out because of the risk, three or
four weeks having to wait to get
food, so there needs to be an
arrangement whereby councils, for
people who they are acting for, can
peopla who they are acting for, ran
go to the front
people who they are acting for, can
go to the front of the queue and I
think you could put that in place
with supermarkets. I come back to
this point, councils do need more
help. From tomorrow morning, we are
waiving the 9:303m restriction on
waiving the 9:30am restriction on
older
waiving the 9:303m restriction on
older and disabled people using
older and disablad peopla using
their
older and disabled people using
their bus passes on mac or delete in
Manchester, so they can get to the
Manchester, so they ran get to the
earty morning
Manchester, so they can get to the
early morning shopping hours. But
earty morning shopping hours. But
please think
early morning shopping hours. But
please think about the capacity of
councils. We have had a decade here
where we are not in the best place
to face this, because the resilience
of some of our public services has
been really degraded. Your
predecessor was on Newsnight the
other night and said he regretted
the silent social care cuts. Silent?
the silant social rare cuts. Silant?
I was pointing
the silent social care cuts. Silent?
I was pointing them out to him every
single day, he
single day, hejust
I was pointing them out to him every
single day, he just chose not to
singla day, he just chose not to
listen to
single day, he just chose not to
listen to what I was saying. As
Frances was saying, there has to be
some reassessment when we get
through this, and we will get
through this, of
through this, ofjust how you cannot
mn
run essential services that councils
mn essential services that councils
provide on
run essential services that councils
provide on thin air and we do need
to remember that, because it is
about the resilience of the country
at the end of the day. Let’s take
one more question, from Sam, again
from Weston—super—Mare, and is an
from Weston-super-Mare, and is an
A-level
from Weston—super—Mare, and is an
A—level student. My name is Sam, I’m
A-level student. My name is Sam, I’m
an A-level
A—level student. My name is Sam, I’m
an A—level student and my question
an A-level student and my question
is given the
an A—level student and my question
is given the cancellation of GCSEs
is given the cancellation of 6655
and
is given the cancellation of GCSEs
and A—levels this year, what is the
and A-levels this year, what is the
fairest
and A—levels this year, what is the
fairest alternative for the students
that have worked so hard for two
years? Is it the case that this year
years? Is it the use that this year
EWUP
group will be
years? Is it the case that this year
group will be the one written off by
universities and future employers?
Frances, I am sure you have been
talking to head
talking to headteachers and
Frances, I am sure you have been
talking to head teachers and all
sorts about this. What is the view,
sorts about this. what is the view,
where are
sorts about this. What is the view,
where are we heading? First of all,
my heart breaks for him and anybody
who has kids that age going through
exams, they know
exams, they knowjust how that
exams, they know just how that
feels. So
exams, they knowjust how that
feels. So I think it is really
important and
importantand I’m
feels. So I think it is really
important and I’m sure the
Government will be on this, they
will provide some real reassurance
to that generation of young people
to that generation of young peopla
that, you
to that generation of young people
that, you know... Are you getting
any sense of how teachers, what they
would think? Yes, I can tell you
would think? Yes, I ran tell you
they are
would think? Yes, I can tell you
they are desperate for really clear
guidance. So they are glad that a
decision has been taken, because
what they were seeing was individual
schools having to close, probably
because of their own staff capacity
or sickness, all issues, so they are
glad there is a decision. They now
need really clear guidance on who
are the children of key workers, how
are we going to make sure that young
peopla are
people are getting that assessment
that is fair and kind to them, given
what therve
what they’ve been through, what do
what therve been through, what do
we do
what they’ve been through, what do
we do about kids in poverty, not
just kids on free school meals, but
we know because of what is happening
with their parents that there are
going to be more and more children
joining the ranks of the poor, how
do we look after them? That is where
councils and voluntary organisations
are so important. And also
are so important. And alsojust
councils and voluntary organisations
are so important. And also just to
remember that teachers are mums and
dads, too, very often and they have
got those worries about what to do I
do? What happens if I need to
self—isolate? So, again, we need
self-isolate? So, again, we need
some real
self—isolate? So, again, we need
some real help for parents, I think.
We have unpaid emergency leave in
this country. Again, unpaid isn’t
going to put food on the table so we
need a joined up approach but I
think teachers and support staff,
who are critical again, we need
dean
clean schools to keep operating, but
dean schools to keep operating, but
they want to
clean schools to keep operating, but
they want to be in the room with
ministers talking about this, head
teachers, teachers, support staff,
because they are the ones that have
to make it work, so they are
desperate to have real dialogue. Let
me relay a tweet from Kevin, who put
when will pupils
me relay 3 tweet from Kevin, who put
when will pupils find out about her
GGFs
GCSEs and A—levels are going to be
awarded? He goes on to say today has
been one of the hardest days I’ve
ever known as a teacher, saying
goodbye to these pupils without
being able to answer their
questions. It must be very
difficult. I got a teenage daughter
who is in that exact situation, she
found out yesterday her GCSEs have
found out yesterday her 6655 have
been
found out yesterday her GCSEs have
been cancelled, on the background of
a couple of weeks of increasing
anxiety and increasing numbers of
kids not going to school and parents
worrying. In fact,
worrying. Infect, I have
kids not going to school and parents
worrying. In fact, I have been doing
Twitter polls to try and gauge
pub“:
public opinion on some of these
issues about where they stand
compared to what the official
advices and I think, although the
scientific advice has been we don’t
need to close the schools yet in
terms of controlling the outbreak,
it has become clear that it
increasingly was going to be
difficult to continue with this
situation. I think to try and answer
the question from Sam about what is
the fairest way. I mean, clearly,
the fairest way. I mean, dearty,
when I did,
the fairest way. I mean, clearly,
when I did, they were called our
levels back then... I remember
those, quite a few of us on the
panel remember —— 0 levels. You did
panel remember -- 0 levels. You did
quite a bit of the
panel remember —— 0 levels. You did
quite a bit of the work through the
year and then there was the exam but
now, quite a lot of work is done
through the year through coursework
and then other assessments that
there is experience in the community
on how to look at the school
children’s coursework and making an
assessment of their grades overall,
so it is going to be a time of
anxiety for them, mixed with great
rejoicing. Some of them are in two
minds! Yes, mixed feelings, perhaps.
So clarity and
50 clarity and resolution in the
So clarity and resolution in the
next few weeks. As I understand, we
will hear tomorrow, is that right,
exactly what is happening with GCSEs
exactly what is happening with 6655
and
exactly what is happening with GCSEs
and A—levels on how children will be
and A-levels on how children will be
able to
and A—levels on how children will be
able to proceed? And this question
of the key workers as well, exactly
how that is defined. I have been
working on that today. Is there
anything you can tell us about that?
anything you ran tell us about that?
It will
anything you can tell us about that?
It will include not only NHS staff
but also social care and those who
but also social rare and those who
are working on
but also social care and those who
are working on the supply of medical
devices, like the sort of masks we
were talking about at the top of the
programme. What about people who
programme. what about peopla who
work in
programme. What about people who
work in supermarkets? Well, the list
will be published tomorrow, we know
we have to get it out tomorrow
because the schools are closing to
everybody else from Monday. This was
a decision nobody wanted to take, it
is just an awful situation and my
heart goes out to Sam, who has
worked so hard, and everybody in
that situation, so we will get that
information out as fast as we
possibly can. Has all of this
possibly ran. Has all of this
happened
possibly can. Has all of this
happened a lot faster than you were
expecting? No, it hasn’t. All of the
steps we have had to take, they were
put out in the action plan two weeks
ago. But it was only a few days ago
it was no question of closing the
schools. That is not quite right, we
have always been clear that we
weren’t doing the steps at that
moment but would be prepared to if
we needed to and then we got to the
point where we needed to. You know,
we have always said, along this
terrible journey,
terriblejourney, as
we have always said, along this
terrible journey, as we
terriblejourney, as we have been
terrible journey, as we have been
trying to
terriblejourney, as we have been
trying to battle this disease, we
will do the right thing at the right
time and the decision of school
closures had to be made, because we
have got to get the virus under
control and, also, the faster we can
control and, also, the faster we ran
get it under
control and, also, the faster we can
get it under control, the faster we
ran
can release some of these measures,
ran release some of these measures,
as well as
can release some of these measures,
as well as putting in the place the
testing we were talking about at the
start of the programme. I agree with
what Matt is saying, I think it was
the right all
the right call and I remember being
the right all and I remember being
in the
the right call and I remember being
in the same position when things
that went looking that possible all
that went looking that possibla all
of a
that went looking that possible all
of a sudden become sober, because
this week, head
this week, headteachers were
this week, head teachers were
finding
this week, headteachers were
finding things quite uncensored ——
unsustainable on the ground because
unsustainable on the ground berause
pupils were
unsustainable on the ground because
pupils were off, staff are off and
it was hard to hold things together.
MY
My daughter is the same, my daughter
is an A—level student, definitely in
is an A-level student, definitely in
two minds,
is an A—level student, definitely in
two minds, half of her wanted to
cry, half wanting to get the
champagne out. I have a feeling
about this, having spoken to her
today, I
today, Ithink
about this, having spoken to her
today, I think there has to be a
fair process that looks not
fair process that looks notjust
fair process that looks not just
that
fair process that looks notjust
that one thing, not
that one thing, notjust predictive
that one thing, not just predictive
grades, but
that one thing, notjust predictive
grades, but works and takes a
rounded view and a fair process,
but, then again, let some who want
to rerun the year. I know that might
create capacity issues and colleges
colleges but this can’t be the last
Covid generation, it can’t be your
year was unlucky and sorry and no
one gets the University they want
and lives are thrown upside down.
You need to take the most permissive
and supportive approach and I
thought I was hearing that from the
Prime Minister yesterday and I have
confidence the Government will come
forward with a fair process
tomorrow. You feel for all of these
peopla who
people who have studied and worked
peopla who have studied and worked
so hard
people who have studied and worked
so hard and we hope that they get a
full decision about what will happen
with their exams. As you said,
Frances, I have friends who are
teachers and they have children of
school and it can be challenging on
school and it ran be challanging on
many fronts,
school and it can be challenging on
many fronts, actually, lots of
children of school. Exams weren’t
always that fair, what do you went
into the room, so this could be a
fairer process. Universities will be
sympathetic, I am at the University
of Liverpool and there has been a
lot of thinking about looking after
both our current students, who are
all working remotely are not missing
lassons, it is
lessons, it is all happening online
lassons, it is all happening online
but also
lessons, it is all happening online
but also how we look at the future
students and make sure they have
their access. As you say, this will
be the Covid generation. There is
one further point to make, which is
when that kids are off school, they
mustn’t go and stay with their
grandparents if they are over 70,
because that would be
counter—productive. So the kids have
counter-productive. So the kids have
got to stay. . .
counter—productive. So the kids have
got to stay... Those kids who stay
in school who only have grandparents
as an option? That is an important
point and slightly surprising.
Schools, clearly something had to
Schools, dearty something had to
change and
Schools, clearly something had to
change and this is now the big
decision you have to make over what
our key workers. An alternative
approach would have been to say
school is no longer compulsory in
this country and parents can decide
this country and parents ran decide
what
this country and parents can decide
what their needs are, their own
needs and the needs of the children
and then you would avoid this really
difficult decision about what is a
key worker, because most workers are
key in some way and those who could
look after their own kids because,
between the parents they can work it
between the parents they ran work it
out, who ran
between the parents they can work it
out, who can stay at home, that
out, who ran stay at home, that
would
out, who can stay at home, that
would work. Those where grandparents
are the only option and we don’t
want them staying with grandparents,
they ran be
they can be put into school and it
they ran be put into school and it
would be
they can be put into school and it
would be a much smaller number than
it is now, it could be
it is now, it could bejudged by the
it is now, it could be judged by the
number of
it is now, it could bejudged by the
number of teachers, you will have
more space in school and
potentially, it would have been an
alternative approach. Well, we will
hear tomorrow but there is a limit
to how much you want to tell us. Our
our reserve, I’m afraid to say. It’s
been an interesting way of doing the
programme --
programme —— our one hour is up. It
programme -- our one hour is up. It
has been
programme —— our one hour is up. It
has been rather quiet in some
senses. I have missed you, audience,
not having you here. I am pleased to
55V
say we will be doing next week and
for the foreseeable future,
for the foreseeable future, live
say we will be doing next week and
for the foreseeable future, live and
eight o’clock. So if you want to be
part of the virtual audience, go and
apply the usual way and if you want
your say on what we have been
discussing this evening, Adrian
dismissing this evening, Adrian
Chile’s
discussing this evening, Adrian
chile’s and
chile’s and Question Time extra time
is on Radio 5Live and you can
is on Radio 5Live and you can listen
is on Radio 5Live and you ran listen
to the
is on Radio 5Live and you can listen
to the coronavirus podcast on BBC
to the coronavirus podrast on BBC
science.
to the coronavirus podcast on BBC
science. Thank you to the panel for
coming and for everyone who recorded
a question or got in touch during
the programme. From
Weston—super—Mare, bye—bye ——
Weston-super-Mare, bye-bye --
coronavirus
Weston—super—Mare, bye—bye ——
coronavirus podcast on BBC Sounds.
I can’t walk there. It’s the middle
of the desert! Ridiculous.
This is doing my head in.
I’m not used to travelling
like this, but I’m getting there.
The bus is about 30cm from the edge.
I wish parts of Yorkshire
were this colourful.
Twin brothers...
Divided by a secret.
MUSIC: Always On My Own by Cat Power
IN NORWEGIAN:
Kristofer Hivju stars
in compelling Norwegian drama...
We’re back! And I’m getting
the sewing room ready
for the biggest Bee ever.
I am going to go nuts in the
haberdashery.
Do my best not to stab you. Ow!
Wow. That’s my blood. Ignore that.
These things have been in storage
for the last year.
0h!
We’ve got more sewers and more
challenges than ever before.
HE WOLF WHISTLES
0K, guys, that’s a wrap.
There is strength in difference.
Another day in the death of Albion,
my friends.
We would recommend arresting him
immediately.
SHOUTING
I want better than this.
No, you don’t.
Yeah, I do! No, you don’t!
I know why you were at Onitem.
You were looking for her.
Sephy, come on!
You don’t want everyone knowing,
do you?
You want the Prime Minister gone,
I want the Prime Minister gone,
which means we have business
together.
So, how does this end?
This programme contains
some strong language
When the Aprican settlers
first came to Albion,
they were faced with
a country in chaos.
An ongoing, brutal civil war
had left many of its barbaric
inhabitants dying of plague
or starvation.
On! Get up! On yourfeet!
Rule by the African Empire was
demonstrably beneficial to the
peoples of Albion
in helping them to overcome
their own worst tendencies... Mm—mm.
Is there a problem, Persephone?
It’s rubbish!
It’s alljust meant to justify
treating Noughts the way we do.
If they’re still poor centuries
later, it’s their own fault.
It’s got nothing to do with us.
Kia. Kia.
Head up.
Go! Go! Go! Go!
Woo!
We’re going to make this more fun
for you idikidii blankers.
Open your packs! Hurry up!
What is this?
We’re done.
You’re done when I say so.
Hurry up!
Come on, peopla! Open up!
You speak for Noughts, do you?
It’s not as if there are any
Noughts here to do it.
Probably just as well.
Ten minutes of listening to you,
and they’d all sign up
for the Liberation Militia.
The Liberation Militia
are terrorists.
The LM is what happens
when you push people too far!
Out, Miss Hadley.
Now.
Open up!
Not in hers.
Put it in his.
This is bullshit, Lekan.
What did you say?
I said this is bullshit.
Shut up!
Lieutenant Baako!
This exercise is over.
Watch yourself, McGregor.
For the first time
in Albion’s history,
Prime Minister Opal Folami has
sanctioned the public
celebration of the Nought festival,
Midsummer, in two days’ time.
Under the circumstances, I think
you’re getting off pretty
lightly with a written apology
to Mr Daramy.
I’ve told the head that you can be
deliberately provocative on occasion.
He’s an idiot, and I won’t write it.
And that you’ll grow out of teenage
politics soon enough.
Not that the Prime Minister
ever has.
You’re still angry about the Noughts
celebrating Midsummer?
Babe, what’s the harm in a few
street parties?
We’re in a period of civil unrest,
Sephy.
We struggle to keep up with
the threat from the terrorists
you’re suddenly so keen to defend,
and yet Opal refuses us
adequate security measures.
Now is not the time.